---
title: "Lack of visual information alters lower limb motor coordination to control center of mass trajectory during walking"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/Shoja2023
category: manuscripts

date: '2023-10-01'
venue: 'Journal of Biomechanics'
paperurl: '[http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper1.pdf](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2023.111650)'
citation: 'Shoja, O., Shojaei, M., Hassanlouei, H., Towhidkhah, F., Amiri, M., Boroomand, H., ... & Zhang, L. (2023). Lack of visual information alters lower limb motor coordination to control center of mass trajectory during walking. Journal of Biomechanics, 155, 111650.'
---

Vision, as queen of the senses, plays a critical role in guiding locomotion. Little is known about the effects of vision on gait coordination in terms of variability. The uncontrolled manifold (UCM) approach offers a window to the structure of motor variability that has been difficult to obtain from the traditional correlation analysis. In this study, we used the UCM analysis to quantify how the lower limb motion is coordinated to control the center of mass (COM) while walking under different visual conditions. We also probed how synergy strength evolved along the stance phase. Ten healthy participants walked on the treadmill with and without visual information. Leg joint angle variance with respect to the whole-body COM was partitioned into good (i.e., the one that kept the COM) and bad (i.e., the one that changed the COM) variances. We observed that after vision was eliminated, both variances increased throughout the stance phase while the strength of the synergy (the normalized difference between the two variances) decreased significantly and even reduced to zero at heel contact. Thus, walking with restricted vision alters the strength of the kinematic synergy to control COM in the plane of progression. We also found that the strength of this synergy varied across different walking phases and gait events in both visual conditions. We concluded that the UCM analysis can quantify altered coordination of COM when vision is blocked and sheds insights on the role of vision in the synergistic control of locomotion.
